#summary Frequently Asked Questions

== I get a {{{java.lang.UnsupportedClassVersionError}}}. Why ? ==

The exception {{{java.lang.UnsupportedClassVersionError: Bad version number in .class file}}} will automatically be thrown if you are trying to launch your test with a JVM 5 or older.

In fact, the java agent developped to modify GWT component (contained in {{{bootstrap.jar}}}) had to be compiled with a 1.6 JDK, beacuse JVM 5 is not able to modify native methods on the fly.

So, you *must* launch your test with a JVM 6 or higher. Of course, the rest of your code can be compiled and run with any other Java version.



== I get a {{{ java.lang.RuntimeException: No mock registered for class}}} What do I miss ? == 

It simply means that you forget to declare the class to be mocked.
Let's assume you have a GWT Widget that make RCP call to the server via {{{MyService.myMethod()}}}.

In your test class, you have to declare a mock for this service :

{{{
@Mock
private MyServiceAsync myService;
}}}

_gwt-test-utils_ will mock your {{{MyService}}} instance with <a href="http://easymock.org/">{{{EasyMock}}}</a>.

Note the you *have to* use the annotation on the asynchronous version of the service interface.

A complete example of mocking GWT RCP call is available in demonstration projects available in the <a href="http://code.google.com/p/gwt-test-utils/wiki/HowToWriteUnitTests#Tests_with_a_GWT_RPC_call">wiki</a>.



== I get a {{{java.lang.UnsatisfiedLinkError}}} when launching my tests. What can I do ?==

This exception will be thrown whenever you use a widget fonctionnality which call a native JSNI method the framework does not patch yet for the standard JVM.

Make sure you are using the lastest version of _gwt-test-utils_. If you are already up-to-date, please report an issue.

== How to simule browser event on widget ? ==

{{{AbstractGWTTest}}} comes with some helpfull methods to simule a large panel of browser event, such as "onClick", "onDblClick", "onBlur", mouseMouve" etc.

In case the method you need is not available, just try with :

{{{yourWidget.onBrowserEvent(new OverrideEvent(Event.ONXXXX))}}}, where XXX is the GWT event you want to submit to your widget.