#summary This page explains how to write integration tests with gwt-test-utils
#sidebar TableOfContents

= Introduction =

Coding complex user use case can be boring and... complex, depending on the used Web technology. 

That's why *gwt-test-utils* comes with features to make it easy for GWT : it provides a CSV human-readable grammar to simule user browser actions and to validate results.
It also enable to connect real server backends to do real integration tests.

= Samples = 

== Common configuration ==

To write integration tests with *gwt-test-utils* CSV grammar, you will need to add the *gwt-test-utils-csv* JAR file in the test classpath, just like explained in the [http://code.google.com/p/gwt-test-utils/wiki/HowToUse How to use] page.

== A basic scenario ==

First, let's write a combinaison of browser actions on a simple UI, with no server call.

The main {{{EntryPoint}}} for our simple GWT module : 

{{{
public class MyApp implements EntryPoint {
	
   private SimpleComposite c1;

   public void onModuleLoad() {
      c1 = new SimpleComposite();
      RootPanel.get().add(c1);
   }
}
}}}

And the added GWT composite : 

{{{
public class SimpleComposite extends Composite {

   private Label label;
   private Image img;

   public SimpleComposite() {
		
      label = new Label();
      img = new Image("img/logo.PNG");

      // The wrapper panel
      VerticalPanel vPanel = new VerticalPanel();
      vPanel.setWidth("100%");
      vPanel.setHorizontalAlignment(VerticalPanel.ALIGN_CENTER);
      vPanel.add(img);
      vPanel.add(label);

      // All composites must call initWidget() in their constructors.
      initWidget(vPanel);

      VerticalPanel dialogVPanel = new VerticalPanel();
      dialogVPanel.setWidth("100%");
      dialogVPanel.setHorizontalAlignment(VerticalPanel.ALIGN_CENTER);

      // Add mouse move handler to the image
      img.addMouseMoveHandler(new MouseMoveHandler() {

         public void onMouseMove(MouseMoveEvent event) {
            label.setText("mouse moved on picture !");
         }

      });

   }
}
}}}

The UI comportement is straightforward : moving the mouse on the logo image will display the message _"mouse moved on picture !"_ in the label.

To run tests, we need a Run class which can told were to find CSV files to run and how to start the GWT UI without the GWT Hosted Mode.
{{{GwtCsvTest}}} is the base class to do it :
{{{
@CsvDirectory(value = "functional-tests", extension = ".csv")
public class MyTestShell extends GwtCsvTest {

   private MyApp myApp = new MyApp();

   @Override
   public String getModuleName() {
      // return the full qualifed name of your GWT module
      return "com.example.mywebapp.GwtTestSample";
   }

   @CsvMethod
   public void initApp() {
      myApp.onModuleLoad();
   }

   @Before
   public void setup() {
      GwtFinder.registerNodeFinder("myApp", new NodeObjectFinder() {
         public Object find(Node node) {
            return csvRunner.getNodeValue(myApp, node);
          }
      });

      GwtFinder.registerNodeFinder("simpleComposite", new NodeObjectFinder() {
         public Object find(Node node) {
            return csvRunner.getNodeValue(RootPanel.get().getWidget(0), node);
           }
      });
   }
}
}}}

The {{{@CsvDirectory}}} class annotation tells *gwt-test-utils* where to find CSV files. In this case, all files with the extension _*.csv*_ in the project folder _functional-tests_ will be loaded. The _extension_ property is optional and equals "*.csv*" by default.

We also write a simple {{{initApp}}} method which initialize the application. This method is annoted with a markup annotation : {{{@CsvMethod}}}, which tells the framework {{{initApp}}} can be used directly in CSV tests.

Finally, we register some custom {{{NodeObjectFinder}}} to the {{{GwtFinder}}} helper object. Those finders relies on the inherited {{{CsvRunner}}} runner instance to provide a cool way to access the UI components.

Now, we can write the corresponding CSV senario and assertions which will use {{{MyTestShell}}} functionalities : 

{{{
start
initApp
assertNotExist;/simpleComposite/label/text
mouseMove;/simpleComposite/img
assertExact;mouse moved on picture !;/simpleComposite/label/text
assertExact;mouse moved on picture !;/root/widget(0)/label/text
assertExact;mouse moved on picture !;/myApp/c1/label/text
assertText;mouse moved on picture !;/myApp/c1/label
}}}

First, we had to start the script with the instruction {{{start}}}.
Than, we called the {{{@CsvMethod MyTestShell.initApp()}}} method to instanciate the GWT application.

Since the application is initialized, we can do some actions. So, let's explain the line {{{assertNotExist;/simpleComposite/label/text}}} : 

 * The first CSV cell desribe the action to do. Each action *must* have a corresponding {{{@CsvMethod}}} in the run test class (or any of its superclass), which can be retrieved by name. {{{GwtCsvTest}}} provides some generic test statements, such as {{{assertNotExist}}}, {{{assertExact}}}, {{{assertNumberExact}}}, {{{assertText}}},  [{{{assertContains}}} and so on.
 * Other cells are the action arguments. In that case, the {{{GwtCsvTest.assertNotExist(String... params)}}} requiers one only argument, the object localisation in the UI.

Object localization strings used to retrived objects in the UI use a _XPath-like_ syntax which is very easy to understand : {{{/simpleComposite/label/text}}} will retrieve the object binded to the "simpleComposite" prefix we defined by registering a custom {{{NodeObjectFinder}}} to {{{GwtFinder}}}.
It assumes this object have an inner property called "label" which have a method "getText" with *no argument*.
So this line just assert the label of the text of our {{{SimpleComposite}}} is null when the application just has been initialized. 

Then, we can simule the browser event on the image : {{{mouseMove;/simpleComposite/img}}}.

In addition to assertion methods, {{{GwtCsvTest}}} provides a lot {{{@CsvMethod}}} to launch events on a widget : "click", "blur", "change", "mouseDown", "mouseUp" and so on.

Finally, we have to assert that the label is correctly filled : 

{{{
assertExact;mouse moved on picture !;/simpleComposite/label/text
assertExact;mouse moved on picture !;/root/widget(0)/label/text
assertExact;mouse moved on picture !;/myApp/c1/label/text
assertText;mouse moved on picture !;/myApp/c1/label
}}}

Those 4 lines do exactly the same thing with 3 different prefix processors : 
 * *simpleComposite* refers to the {{{SimpleComposite}}} instance we added in the {{{RootPanel}}} in {{{MyApp.onModuleLoad()}}}
 * *root* refers to the {{{RootPanel}}} itself. The corresponding {{{NodeObjectFinder}}} is registered in the {{{GwtCsvTest.getNodeObjectFinder(prefix)}}} we called after overriding it.
 * *myApp* refers to the custom {{{EntryPoint}}} instance we initialize though the {{{MyTestShell.initApp()}}} method.
 * The _assertText_ csv method can be used to validate {{{HasText.getText()}}} values. To validate {{{HasHTML.getHTML()}}} values, you should use the _assertHTML_.


By the way, this scenario could have been written simply with the GWT API just like we did to write [http://code.google.com/p/gwt-test-utils/wiki/HowToWriteUnitTests UI unit tests]. But it would have been a lot more verbose (by using reflection tools explicitly, etc).

Now that you know how to do it with the CSV grammar and understand its basics, let's write a more complex scenario.

== Scenario with server calls ==

First, we have to enhance your GWT application to make some server calls. To do so, we will simply reuse the {{{RCPComposite}}} and {{{RCPService}}} classes we developped for [http://code.google.com/p/gwt-test-utils/wiki/HowToWriteUnitTests#Tests_with_a_GWT_RPC_call How to write unit tests] page.

{{{
public class MyApp implements EntryPoint {
	
   private SimpleComposite c1;
   private RPCComposite c2;
   
   public void onModuleLoad() {

      c1 = new SimpleComposite();
      RootPanel.get().add(c1);
      c2 = new RPCComposite();
      RootPanel.get().add(c2);
   }
}
}}}

We also have to modify the test class to provide some glue to connect the GWT UI with a real server backend.

{{{
@CsvDirectory(value = "functional-tests", extension = ".csv")
public class MyTestShell extends GwtCsvTest {

   private MyApp myApp = new MyApp();

   @Override
   public String getModuleName() {
      // return the full qualifed name of your GWT module
      return "com.example.mywebapp.GwtTestSample";
   }

   @CsvMethod
   public void initApp() {
      myApp.onModuleLoad();
   }

   @Before
   public void setup() {
      GwtFinder.registerNodeFinder("myApp", new NodeObjectFinder() {
         public Object find(Node node) {
            return csvRunner.getNodeValue(myApp, node);
          }
      });

      GwtFinder.registerNodeFinder("simpleComposite", new NodeObjectFinder() {
         public Object find(Node node) {
            return csvRunner.getNodeValue(RootPanel.get().getWidget(0), node);
           }
      });

      GwtFinder.registerNodeFinder("rpcComposite", new NodeObjectFinder() {
         public Object find(Node node) {
            return csvRunner.getNodeValue(RootPanel.get().getWidget(1), node);
           }
      });

      addGwtCreateHandler(createRemoteServiceCreateHandler());
   }

   private GwtCreateHandler createRemoteServiceCreateHandler() {
      return new RemoteServiceCreateHandler() {

         @Override
         public Object findService(Class<?> remoteServiceClazz) {
            if (remoteServiceClazz == MyService.class) {
               return new MyServiceImpl();
            }
            return null;
         }
      };
   }

}
}}}

First, we register a new {{{NodeObjectFinder}}} for string "rpcComposite".

Than, we add a custom GwtCreateHandler to handle the {{{MyServiceAsync service = (MyServiceAsync) GWT.create(MyService.class);}}} instruction.
We used the out-of-the-box {{{RemoteServiceCreateHandler}}} implementation which handle RPC service creation and RPC calls exception. The only thing to do is to implement the abstract function {{{RemoteServiceCreateHandler.findService(Class<?> remoteServiceClazz)}}}.
In our case, to ask for a {{{MyService}}} service will return an instance of its simple implementation {{{MyServiceImpl}}}.

Now, we can test the composite with a CSV test : 

{{{
start
initApp
assertNotExist;/rpcComposite/label/text
click;/rpcComposite/button
assertExact;Hello OCTO !;/rpcComposite/label/text
}}}

We just passed a full GWT integration test in a standard JVM, with a real service implementation.

Of course, this implementation is quite basic. 
But you could easily write your {{{findService}}} implementation which will get your service from a [http://www.springsource.org/ Spring] context, or any server backend you could imagine ;-)


== Using CSV macros ==

Sometimes, several of your integration test senarios could be quite redundant.
_gwt_test_utils_ provide a CSV macro mecanism to group same instructions in the same file.

Look at the test examples above : 

 * In {{{TestSimpleComposite.csv}}} :

{{{
start
initApp
assertNotExist;/simpleComposite/label/text
mouseMove;/simpleComposite/img
assertExact;mouse moved on picture !;/simpleComposite/label/text
assertExact;mouse moved on picture !;/root/widget(0)/label/text
assertExact;mouse moved on picture !;/myApp/c1/label/text
assertText;mouse moved on picture !;/myApp/c1/label
}}}

 * In {{{TestRPCComposite.csv}}} : 

{{{
start
initApp
assertNotExist;/rpcComposite/label/text
click;/rpcComposite/button
assertExact;Hello OCTO !;/rpcComposite/label/text
}}}

It could be interessting to regroup the "initApp" and the first assertion statements in one common file for the two test cases.

This could be done in {{{macro-init.csv}}} : 

{{{
macro;InitialisationMacro
initApp
assertNotExist;/simpleComposite/label/text
assertNotExist;/simpleComposite2/textBox/text
assertNotExist;/rpcComposite/label/text
endmacro
}}}

The first line of a macro must be {{{macro;NAME}}} with "NAME" the name of the macro.

Than, just use it in your CSV test files : 

 * In {{{TestSimpleComposite.csv}}} :

{{{
start
runmacro;InitialisationMacro
mouseMove;/simpleComposite/img
assertExact;mouse moved on picture !;/root/widget(0)/label/text
assertExact;mouse moved on picture !;/myApp/c1/label/text
assertExact;mouse moved on picture !;/simpleComposite/label/text
assertText;mouse moved on picture !;/myApp/c1/label
}}}

 * In {{{TestRPCComposite.csv}}} : 

{{{
start
runmacro;InitialisationMacro
click;/rpcComposite/button
assertExact;Hello OCTO !;/rpcComposite/label/text
}}}

Finally, there is one thing left to do : to specify _initMacro.csv_ as a Macro file for *gwt-test-utils* to parse it correctly. It can be done with the {{{@CsvMacros}}} annotation : 

{{{
@CsvDirectory(value = "functional-tests", extension = ".csv")
@CsvMacros(value = "functional-tests", pattern = "^macro.*\\.csv$")
public class MyTestShell extends GwtCsvTest {

   ...
}
}}}

In this case, {{{MyTestShell}}} will load as a CSV macro any file in the project folder _functional-tests_ which name is matching the java regular expression {{{^macro.*\\.csv$}}}. Each file which does not match this expression but ends with '.csv' will be considered has a integration-test scenario to launch.

The {{{pattern}}} parameter is optional. If it's not set, any file in _functional-tests_ would have been loaded as a CSV macro.